Ethereum

Before we dive into the concept of Ehtereum, let us first take a brief peek into what Blockchain is. Blockchain, in a nutshell, is a type of distributed ledger or decentralized database that can be pictured as a chain of blocks wherein each block contains some useful information. So, the basic aim is to introduce a decentralized that will help remove the dependency on a central authority wherever possible. 
It would be beneficial to have some insight into what decentralized means before we have a look into the world of ehtereum. When we say a decentralized network, it means that there is no central authority controlling it and the control is spread across the participating nodes. 

Now, let us first look at the overview of what Ethereum is:-
Ethereum is a decentralized system based on blockchain technology, that aims to provide a platform for building and deploying decentralized applications. It also supports the concept of smart contracts, more about which we will come across shortly. The co-founder of ethereum Vitalik Buterin imagined it as a "world computer", an entity that shelters a virtual machine (the Ethereum Virtual Machine), a Turing-complete language (Solidity), a token (ETH) and fuel (gas), all under one roof to power every transaction within the network. Ehtereum can also be used to develop Decentralized Autonomous Organizations (DAO), which basically is a fully autonomous, decentralized organization with no single leader run by a collection of smart contracts deployed on the ethereum network. 
Now, what do we mean by decentralized applications? Well, in layman terms, a decentralized application is the one that runs on a peer-to-peer network with no single central authority controlling it, not even the original author of the same. So, in short, ethereum aims to eradicate the notion that blockchain technology predominantly revolves around digital currency, by introducing a platform that will cater to a wide range of other applications like developing decentralized applications, etc.

Now, before we move ahead, let us address the elephant in the room: Is Ethereum similar to Bitcoin?
Well, there is some similarity between the two. One is that both are based upon the concept of a peer-to-peer network and both build upon the concept of the blockchain network. They both have an inbuilt cryptocurrency and both cater to the concept of digital currency. But apart from a few similarities, both of them have a completely different purpose. While Bitcoin is predominantly a digital currency providing a means for a peer-to-peer transaction, Ethereum focuses on many other applications of Blockchain technology like decentralized applications, smart contracts, etc. We will see the key differences between the two later on in this blog.

Now, let us have a glance on the basic attributes of Ethereum:-

1) Smart Contracts -> Smart contracts are computer programs collected in a blockchain. It is basically a computer code that helps in facilitating, verifying, or negotiating a contract agreement. It facilitates the act of credible transactions (like the exchange of money, shares, etc without the involvement of a third party. It automatically executes when certain conditions are satisfied. In ethereum, when a smart contract is invoked ( by creating a transaction to the contract and supplying to the contract other information that it may require), every node computer will run it using the ethereum virtual machine and reach to a conclusion. Each computer will get the same information and hence if no anomaly occurs, they all will be in the same state and hence reach the same conclusion.

2) Etheruem Virtual Machine ->  Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM) runs on every participating node and basically helps in running the smart contracts in these nodes. It is a  "Turing complete" machine and enables anyone to run any program given enough time and memory.  

Now, does ethereum have its own cryptocurrency like bitcoin? What do miners get as rewards in the ethereum network? Let us have a look into what the answer to these questions is.
3) Ether ->  Ether (ETH) is ethereum's very own cryptocurrency. While ether can be used as a tradable digital currency just like bitcoin, its primary focus is to facilitate the operation of the Ethereum smart contract and decentralized application platform. Just like miners in bitcoin network receive BTC as a reward for mining the blocks, in ethereum miners are rewarded with ether for their time and efforts. For every block, they mine they receive 5 ETH as their reward. While the largest unit to measure ether is ETH, the smallest unit is wei. There are some other intermediate units like finney, szabo, etc.   

4) Gas ->  Ethereum has a second type of token known as 'Gas'. It is used to pay miners for including transactions to their block and a certain amount of gas is required for every smart contract execution. Every action costs a certain amount of gas depending upon the computational power required and the time it takes. The more complex the smart contract is, the more is the gas that it requires to run. While the gas amount depends on the computational power required, the gas price is specified by the person who wants to run the contract when he/she requests for the same. So, the total payment would be a product of the gas amount and gas price. This concept of gas helps reduce the chance of transaction spams that would otherwise be easier to pull off if running the smart contracts where free.  

5) ETH tokens -> The rate of token generation is constant in ehtereum every year and the number of ETH in existence is equal to 'Pre-mine + Block rewards + Uncle rewards + Uncle referencing rewards'. Pre-mine refers to the creation of approximately 72 million ETH for the crowd sale in July/August 2014. Around this time, it was decided that no more than 18m ETH could be mined per year. As discussed earlier, every miner gets as reward 5 ETH for successfully mining a block and this is known as 'Block reward'. We will shortly see what does the term 'Uncle' and 'Uncle referencing' reward mean.

Now. there is also a concept ..... to ethereum called the Uncle nodes. 
Uncle nodes -> There are instances when multiple blocks are mined at the same time. In such scenarios, only one of them becomes part of the main chain. In bitcoin, the other valid blocks that do not become a part of the main chain are referred to as 'Orphan' blocks and they are never referenced again nor do their miners get any reward. But, in ethereum, these blocks are referred to as 'Uncle' blocks and they can be referenced by later blocks although the data within them is not used. When an uncle block is referenced, later on, it created about 4.375 ETH as a reward for the miner of the block and around 0.15 ETH per uncle for the one who references the uncle block. This helps to encourage the miners to mine even though there is a high chance of creating a non-mainchain block. 

Before we wrap up this blog, let us look into some commendable differences between ethereum and bitcoin:-

1) Block time -> While the time between blocks is around 10 minutes in Bitcoin, it is only around 14 seconds in ethereum. This means that block generation is faster in ethereum and ethereum transactions are recorded into ethereum's blockchain faster than the bitcoin transaction getting into the bitcoin blockchain.

2) Size of Block -> The size of a block in ethereum depends upon the complexity of contracts being run. Currently, most of the ethereum blocks are under 2KB in size which is much smaller compared to the 1MB size of bitcoin blocks.

3) Ehtereum supports the concept of smart contracts and provides with Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM) to run the smart contracts in every node computer.

4) Token generation -> While the bitcoin token generation halves every four years in bitcoin, in ethereum token generation is at a constant number every year.

5) Miner's reward -> While miners get 12.5 BTC for successfully mining a block in bitcoin, in ethereum they receive around 5 ETH. Also, ethereum provides uncle rewards and uncle referencing rewards to the miners who create and reference uncle blocks respectively, while blockchain does not incentivize the orphan blocks.
 